the United Nations top court has ordered
Israel to prevent destruction in Gaza
yet its military is Raising entire
neighborhoods to the ground large wavs
of the strip have become uninhabitable
so what would it take for Israel to stop
its War this is Inside
Story
hello welcome to the program I
Hashim Israel's war has laid waste to
the Gaza Strip 85% of the population has
been displaced much of the vital
infrastructure is so badly damaged the
experts say it will take decades to
rebuild a ruling by the international
court of justice States Israel must take
action to prevent the destruction of
evidence linked to possible acts of
genocide but the military has largely
ignored this and if anything has
intensified its bombing campaign what
can be done to force Israel to comply
let's take a closer look at the extent
of the damage in
Gaza according to satellite images
assessments by International Aid
agencies and figures from the Gaza
government office more than half of all
homes in the strip have been damaged
since October the 7th education
facilities have also been targeted 346
schools have been partially or
completely destroyed and every single
university has been raised 269 places of
worship churches and mosqu alike have
been damaged 11 bakeries are destroyed
and throughout the territory only five
hospitals are still able to offer
treatment and only basic first
aid there's plenty to discuss with our
guest but first this
report Gaza has become
unrecognizable homes businesses schools
mosques churches all raised to the
ground I'm standing on the rubble of a
house that was destroyed by the Israelis
the situation is very difficult we tried
to construct a tent just so we had some
shelter
the international court of justice has
ordered Israel to take steps to prevent
the destruction of and preserve evidence
related to any possible acts of genocide
but its military campaign has only
intensified since the ruling the war on
Gaza has been described as one of the
most destructive assaults in modern
history virtually no corner of the strip
is Untouched by Israeli bombs All That
Remains is dust and Rubble
we went to the school and set up a
makeshift shelter but even the school
isn't a school anymore how are we going
to survive there are no hospitals no
medicines we can't afford to take care
of our children Al jazer has tracked the
extent of the damage on buildings from
October When The War Began until the end
of January they show more than half of
all buildings have been destroyed
reports estimate that as much as 70% of
gaza's homes are deemed to be unlivable
of the strip's 35 hospitals five are
only partly functioning just one
specialist facility is still operating
so now it's literally literally the only
Hospital which can provide a
neurosurgery to Gaz people the only H
which can provide complex general
surgery or ICU care in the whole of
Gaza the UN warns it could take decades
to rebuild Gaza and is calling for
hostilities to end
immediately Veronica Pedroza Al jazer
for Inside
Story let's bring in our guest in the he
Ahmed Abu is a legal researcher and
advocacy officer at alhak an independent
Palestinian human rights organization
based in raal in Amsterdam Kate McIntosh
is the executive director of the
University of California Los Angeles
promise Institute Europe she was
involved in the development of
international criminal law in its early
years and contributed to defining many
of its elements here in DHA we have
Muhammad abua professor at the School of
International Service in International
Peace and conflict resolution at
American University in Washington DC
welcome to the program Ahmed we've been
over the last few days talking about the
different aspects of the six orders that
were uh issued by the international
court of justice and weather Israel was
in compliance with those orders today we
would put more emphasis on the uh
destruction of evidence and on this I
would like to ask you a question what
kind of evidence was the court having in
mind um I think the court had in mind uh
all kind of uh evidence U Hashim and
allow me um just to clarify um uh in
relation to our work as alhak we the
oldest human rights organization in
Palestine and in the region and this is
the first time in our history since our
establishment in
1979 that we had to announce to the
public that we're unable to cover to
cover the situation in the Gaza STP
properly this gives you an indication of
the gravity of the situation on the
ground some of our staff had to evacuate
the north uh lost their homes lost their
loved ones and it's becoming extremely
difficult to document what's going on uh
on the ground if history teaches us
something uh during every genocide that
happened throughout history the
perpetrators of international crimes in
general always try to destroy evidence
that will uh uh condemn them in the
future Israel is also doing that um the
very fact that Palestinian human rights
organizations are unable to continue uh
doing their work on the ground is a
serious uh concern uh should be a
serious concern to all International
Justice mechanisms I think the court was
absolutely right to indicate that and I
think the uh concern is shared not only
by South Africa but by a number of
states uh just before uh starting the
show it was announced by South Africa
that yesterday South Africa has asked
the court to consider um um as on on an
urgent pis uh to uh make a ruling asking
Israel to comply with the um uh with the
provision measures uh ruling and the
court can do that and accordance with
article 75 paragraph one of the rules of
procedure of the international court of
justice in cases where the court ordered
an order of provisional measures and
fears that this order is not being
complied with it can as we say in Latin
propor Moto based on its own initiative
the court can order uh the state to
comply uh with this order and I think
we're heading towards that uh the
concerns are being shared by South
Africa and other states and I think the
court has a responsib ability to make
sure that Israel respects the order of
the Court Kate when you see that
provisional measure by the icj which
says that Israel has to take all
necessary measures within its capacity
to pre preserve evidence people would
say what what is the icga trying to
achieve here when normal people in Gaza
would tell you look just by having a
look at the Relentless bombardment the
massive loss of life shouldn't that be
enough for the
icj yeah there's a certain Force to that
Hashem for sure but we should remember
remember first of all that genocide is a
very difficult crime to prove and the
scale of the destruction does not in
itself uh establish genocide there's
that critical element which we've all
heard discussed of the special genocidal
intent so when the court comes to decide
to consider the full proceedings P these
initial provisional measures they will
be looking to see whether that special
intent is present and that special
intent can be inferred from but it's a
very high threshold it actually has to
be the only possible inference so there
will be a lot of other evidence that
will be very relevant to that we could
think about um internal records of
government or Army meetings and we could
also think about the sthe of digital
evidence which is becoming more and more
relevant in proceedings whether from
private uh Facebook social media
accounts or otherwise so there's all
sorts of evidence that um will be
relevant to this request and in
establishing whether or not this is a
genocide the court will be looking
beyond the physical destruction which as
you say is so obvious to all of us
Muhammad activists on the ground have
been documenting cases of bombardment
Destruction schools hospitals churches
mosques 4,000 of history of Gaza
couldn't this be couldn't this be a case
to be prosecuted or be it at an
individual base by the IC for example in
the near
future thank you I think in absolutely
the the the scale of Destruction as you
mentioned whether it is mosques
hospitals the school on relief agencies
and and the entire infrastructure there
is no agency or organizations on
theground that has not been affected and
I think the scale of Destruction as
mentioned by Kate and also by Ahmed
before is different definitely um
provide enough evidence and enough um
things on the ground to be a base
for for cases genocide definitely ethnic
cleansing and we see that we see that
not
only prior to the ruling of 26 of
January but also after the the numbers
after are also staggering you have about
2,000 Palestinian killed since then and
you have also 3,000 injured as well
these are these are the minimal number
that were referred another Statistics we
have it is regarding the houses that
were demolished and destroyed over 44
squares of houses which is you know
amount to hundreds of houses have been
deliberately demolished and destroyed
and bombed since 20 since 26 but add to
this the issue of starvation the issue
of water clean water and something that
not many people talking about it which
is the pumping of water sea water in the
in the tunnels that Israel been doing
for for the past few months that have a
major effect on the livelihood and also
the capacity to inhabit Gaza afterward
so you know it's it's really mind
bugling when people talk about you know
more evidence of intentionality but I
guess as Kate said the threshold is very
high and I think there have been enough
reason for that at this point Ahmed we
do understand this is an extremely
delicate case and this explains why the
the court has been trying to do its best
to navigate through the entire procedure
and look for the most practical measures
to be implemented but the measures when
you look at them and when you read them
in detail do they really make any sort
of sense for the people of Gaza who have
to walk daily through the areas that now
lie in ruin and whose basic instinct is
just to survive for another extra day um
you know the the way the uh provision
measures are um uh drafted and and
decided is not necessarily that it it
doesn't live up to uh to the gravity of
the situation in my view I think there
have been um serious inding genous uh
attempts by certain states to downplay
the effect of these provision measures
so we had the representative of the us
at the security Council saying let's uh
talk about what the or the court did not
order ceas fire and this is quite a
shameful and disingenuous attempt
because the court in such situations
does not order e se's fire um the
similar situation to that is that of
Myanmar where the court did not order
Cession of hostilities but it it orders
immediately uh uh stopping the genocidal
act so if you look at the provision
measures if Israel wants to implement
them they effectively mean EC's fire now
I totally understand that it's hard to
sell that to people on the ground I'm
originally from Gaza I lived through and
survived three of those military
aggressions on the Gaza STP and I know
how people uh feel but it's important to
clarify for the public that the fact
that the provision measures did not
order cessation of hostilities it does
it doesn't mean that they were not uh
good enough I think effectively this
means cessation of hostilities my only
reservation on the provision measures um
I think would be uh twofold one the um
uh giving Israel a whole month to comply
with the order I think it was a long
period considering the serious risk of
genocide that we're facing and the fact
that the court did not order Israel to
allow fact finding missions in previous
cases the court has relied on the
reports of fact finding missions and
commission of inquiries to establish
genocide so the big question for the
court is if the court saw a plausible
cause for genocide why it gave a whole
month for Israel to comply and why it
didn't order Israel to allow fact
finding missions to access to the
territory and the big question now the
most important question now is um with
South Africa's refer to the court that
Israel is not complying and the court
need to intervene what will the court do
the court has the authority to uh um
Step In in such situations because
Israel is ignoring its provision
measures and making a mcy not only of
the Court's ruling but of international
L as a whole Kate if by the end of this
month lawyers from South Africa go back
to the icj and say listen we gave the
Israelis you gave the Israelis a
month and within that month the
Relentless bombardment
continued property was destroyed entire
areas were raised people lost their
lives this is a strong indication that
uh Israel uh was in breach of that
provisional measure would that resonate
among the judges
judges well the question for the judges
will be what to do at that point um I
mean I personally and I I get the sense
listening to Ahmed that he would agree I
felt that the the court uh you know
retained its Integrity with this ruling
I think they went about as far as they
can go I would agree with Ahmed that to
order a cessation of hostilities was not
uh you know that would have been a
stretch really under the genocide
convention they did order what they
could order which was don't commit
genocide and let in humanitarian relief
etc etc so I think it was a strong
order um the court itself does not have
any enforcement capability of course
it's a consensus-based mechanism which
was set up essentially after the second
world war war to prevent further
conflict so that courts would um resolve
their disputes there rather than uh
going to war so the only part the only
body of the United Nations that has
authority to carry out any enforcement
action is the security Council and of
course the Security Council is fairly
unlikely to act in this matter due to
the um the veto Powers as we know
Muhammad you you've spent quite some
time on the politics of reconstruction
in different parts of the world I would
like to ask you a question about Gaza
once the war is over once this is all
over experts are saying it will take
Gaza decades to rebuild do you think
it's going to be a purely technical
issue or a p purely politically
motivated issue the Reconstruction of
Gaza I think that's a great point
because I think it also connect to the
previous point that Kate and Ahmed
mentioned you know even if the best case
scenario where the the court were
reissued and ask for ceasefire cessation
of hostility after you know after the uh
month is over we have a problem in the
implementation and in the execution um
mechanism of such orders we basically
come back to the political realm where
the security Council and the the the US
using the veto in order to prevent and
the implementation and I think that is
one of the core political issue that has
been an obstacle an obstruction for many
many resolutions in the United Nation
over 70 of them that has been vetoed so
the problem is always have been
political rather than legal or rather
than any other any other justification
on the same issue on the on the
Reconstruction and the rebuilding of
Gaza Gaza has been destroyed different
scales in
2014 you know in four other Wars in Gaza
and it's always have been the the
politics of it the military the military
control of Israel on those borders the
mechanism that they put in place for
implementation and to what extent gazan
themselves and Palestinian themselves
have a decision in in the process of
rebuilding we know from the theory and
the practice the the more the more the
rebuilding mechanisms are imposed by the
the the the again in this case Israel or
the United States or other countries the
less likelihood that this rebuilding
will take place in the benefit or for
the benefit of the Palestinian national
movement or for the people on the ground
not only issues of accountability and
Corruption and other but also you know
we do rebuilding in order not to go back
and Destroy them after five or 10 years
and I think that's where the problem is
you want to rebuild the life and the
infrastructure but more important you
want to rebuild on the basis of a
political Vision a political agreement a
political condition that will prevent a
another war in five six years and
another control of Israel Over the
borders wouldn't be extremely delicate
for all the parties Ahmed to move
forward without a road map when it comes
to the Reconstruction because for
example the Americans the Israelis and
the Europeans there's a general
consensus in the Western Hemisphere that
Hamas should have no say in the future
and this explains why the they say that
the palestin authority has to take over
Gaza anytime soon how do you see
reconstruction of Gaza when you don't
settle who is going to take over and who
should have a legitimate right over Gaza
yeah first of all answering this
question allow me to to to say that it's
only for the Palestinians themselves to
decide who govern which part of the
occupied palan territory it's not for
the Americans it's not for Western
governments it's only for the
Palestinians through a democratic
process through elections notably Israel
has been preventing the Palestinians
from having elections in these Jerusalem
and that's the only reason that we don't
have a democratic uh process the big
questions for W allies of Israel if
they're so uh um supportive of
democracies and want to see a de
Democratic process why for the past
years they didn't pressure their Ally in
the Middle East to allow the
Palestinians to have elections uh this
is this I think need to be clarified at
the outset and the second thing is
you're absolutely right um several
people still waiting to rebuild their
homes that were destroyed in 2014 for
example or even uh back in 2012 or 2008
2009 so this is a one of the most
important issues that need to be
discussed the Gaza that we know the Gaza
that I grow up in no longer exists the
North End of the Gaza Strip has been
destroyed I was in California last month
testifying in a case against President
Biden Secretary of State blinkin and
Secretary of Defense Austin where I
testify to that effect that everything
we know in Gaza has been destroyed from
my kindergarten to my university and
this is also if you allow me to touch on
something
um Kate said uh of course genocide is
hard to prove of course the threshold is
very high but the level of Destruction
that we see in Gaza the intentional uh
attacks against hospitals schools these
are all serious uh signs of the
intention to ethnically cleanse the
Palestinians to destroy them in hall or
in park because in every armed conflict
um hospitals are the main point where uh
it gives uh the civilian population the
feeling that there's safety where they
can receive Medical Aid and Medical Care
Israel has been deliberately targeting
hospitals from the north to the south in
a in a clear plan to push the
Palestinians to create conditions to
induce them to leave uh uh to Sinai and
this is not new plan zionists have uh
often spoke about the Gaza Strip and the
Gaza population as a demographic burden
uh Kate never before had any War been so
documented the way the war in Gaza has
been documented by media and by
activists on the ground to the to the
point where people now are drawing
parallels between what happened in Gaza
and what happened long time ago in the
German city of
Dresden now from your own previous
experiences postum rights field
operations in Rwanda and and Bosnia what
do you think will be the biggest
challenge facing the people of Gaza once
this this is all
over oh my goodness what's this going to
look like once it's all
over um I think the Gaza is really a
unique situation I mean every situation
is unique but uh the situation in
Yugoslavia and in Rwanda was quite
different in terms of a certain Clarity
emerged of who was going to be in charge
and who would be organizing the
Reconstruction and then there was of
course massive support from the
International Community in both of those
two situations where here we have this
very fundamental political issue which
is
unresolved um if I could go back to your
earlier part about the volume of the
evidence though as well um seeing as
we're discussing that particular order
of the court I think the volume of
digital evidence is both um a great you
know is a blessing to investigators and
prosecutors but also you know a
significant Challenge and this isn't the
only conflict of course which has been
faced with this I think the most anal
situation might be Syria where there is
an huge digital archive which is being
managed at least the management is been
coordinated by the independent
investigative mechanism which was set up
um for Syria um by the United Nations uh
and you know they're making great steps
in trying to understand how to search
and to categorize uh this huge wealth of
digital evidence uh in order to identify
particular individuals and particular
locations and and I think just from the
technical perspective that's clearly
going to be uh very relevant to how um
judges prosecuted investigators are
going to be able to deal with the wealth
of digital evidence that we're all
seeing coming from Gaza Muhammad as you
know the politices of reconstruction is
complex to the point where now the
Americans behind closed doors are asking
countries wealthy countries in the GCC
for example to step in and provide
financial assistance to the
Reconstruction effort some of those
countries are voicing concerns saying we
have to wait and see who takes over Gaza
to do that you have to ask the
Palestinians what what what's the next
what's the way forward but before that
others are trying to bring the Hamas and
the Palestinian Authority to negotiate a
political settlement all this just with
the hope to move forward and restart the
Reconstruction how do you see that
process unfold in the near future is it
aible does it make perfect sense to the
Palestinians themselves well I think
that's you know that's like like Ahmed
said this is the the the thinking today
and also based on our knowledge of post
reconstruction in a postconflict
situation the more the more inclusion
and the more the political agreement
that will be reached or the outcome of
the war the more it takes into
consideration the needs and the
aspiration of the people who were
involved in the resistance whether it is
in mindo Philippine whether it is Sri
Lanka whether it is
Bosnia the the more you do inclusive
agreement and take into consideration
the voices of Palestinian and even
follow the the rash you know nothing
nothing about us without us the more you
can secure and prevent the next War so
it all depends on what type of intention
and the political willing willingness
they will have for a palestin genuine
Palestinian State genuine Authority in
place that will give the Palestinian
their National Liberation um aspiration
and I think that's the core issue even
if you decide on genocide or you don't
decide and genocide at the end of the
day you have a 100,000 people killed and
injured and there need to be a political
agreement that allow the Palestinian to
have their self-determination and
dignity Ahmed in less than 15 seconds
will Gaza will Gaza ever be the same
again Gaza will always Prevail Gaza will
always Prevail despite the oppression
despite the destruction and the people
of Gaza are teaching all of us a lesson
how to hold on to our humanity and Gaza
is our window to the reality of this
world that we don't live in a
postcolonial world but unfortunately we
live in a neocolonial and an imperial
one and Gaza is spearheading uh
resisting that uh uh domination formula
lady and gentlemen I really appreciate
in your Insight looking forward to see
how this whole case at the icj will
unfold in the near future Kate McIntosh
Ahmed Abu and Muhammad Abu thank thank
you very much
indeed and thank you too for watching
you can see the program again anytime by
visiting our website Al ja.com for
further discussion go to our Facebook
page that's
facebook.com AJ insid story you can also
join the conversation on on X our handle
is at AJ inside story from me hash and
the entire team here in Doha bye for
now